# Time-Varying Sensitivity Analysis

**Time-Varying Sensitivity Analysis Reveals Relationships Between Watershed Climate and Variations in Annual Parameter Importance in Regions With Strong Interannual Variability**

As weather and climate extremes continue to set new records (WMO, 2017), it is becoming increasingly important to study the effects of these extremes on hydrologic cycles (Bates et al., 2008) as well as our ability to simulate these changes within hydrologic models (Nijssen et al., 2001; Xu, 1999). In the United States, California has experienced strong fluctuations between extreme wet and dry years, oscillating between receiving abundant precipitation, often falling as snow in mountain regions, and experiencing extreme droughts, including a recent major drought that lasted from 2012 to 2016 (USGS). This strong seasonality provides a unique test case to evaluate the impacts of regional-scale climate variability within the context of hydrologic modeling. Recent studies in California predict decreases in mean annual streamflow, reduced snowpack, and more rapid snowmelt runoff in the future (Knowles et al., 2002; Medell n-Azuara et al., 2008; Miller et al., 2003; Vicuna et al., 2008). As hydrologic models can provide a coherent picture of hydrological system behavior under past, present, and future conditions (Schewe et al., 2014), learning from the past to understand present catchment processes and using this knowledge to predict future behavior is a major goal of hydrological research.
\
\
Linking changes in climate to changes in hydrology is often performed via the use of hydrological models, which simulate the responses of hydrologic processes to average as well as extreme conditions, and identify what characteristics of a watershed system may influence hydrologic behavior (Guse et al., 2016; Zhan et al., 2013). At the watershed scale, hydrological simulations can provide valuable insights regarding system behavior, relevant processes, and how processes vary across different sites (Euser et al., 2013; Hrachowitz et al., 2014), especially when historical observations are available. While watershed models representing a range of complexity exist (Clark et al., 2008; Song et al., 2015), numerous studies have leveraged conceptual models to study watersheds across various hydro-climatologic conditions (Herman, Kollat, et al., 2013; Herman, Reed, et al., 2013; Pianosi et al., 2015; Sarrazin et al., 2016; Shafii et al., 2015).
\
\
By simplifying relationships between model parameters and simulated watershed processes, conceptual models enable straightforward evaluation that can be exploited to advance our understanding of controls on model performance. In particular, diagnostic methods applied to conceptual watershed models can aid in evaluating model behavior with respect to the physical system (Gupta et al., 2008; Wagener et al., 2009). The parsimony of conceptual models further enables rapid simulations that facilitate diagnostic evaluations capable of spanning multidecadal periods and numerous watersheds. These diagnostic evaluations are often performance-based, evaluating the suitability of a model for a specific application by comparing the observed and simulated streamflow values (Herman, Kollat, et al., 2013; Herman, Reed, et al., 2013; Pianosi et al., 2016; van Werkhoven et al., 2008). Sensitivity Analysis (SA) is one type of performance-based diagnostic analysis that continues to be used for model calibration, diagnostic evaluation, dominant control analysis, and even robust decision-making. It can also be used to evaluate the consistency of model behavior with expected system behavior, even when output observations are not available (Hartmann et al., 2015; Oreskes et al., 1994; Wegener & Pianosi, 2019). Generally, SA methods have been used to interpret model behavior in the context of the system being modeled and to identify which parameter inputs to a given model are most important to model performance (Ghasemizade et al., 2017; Pianosi et al., 2016).
\
\
The hydrologic community has applied SA toward numerous objectives. Time-varying SA, in which variance- based methods are applied to different time steps, can be used to determine parameter impact on the model performance through time (Garambois et al., 2013; Herman, Kollat, et al., 2013; Herman, Reed, et al., 2013; Pianosi et al., 2016; Wagener et al., 2003, 2001). To date, many studies have applied time-varying SA across numerous periods and time-step lengths (Garambois et al., 2013; Ghasemizade et al., 2017; Pianosi et al., 2016). When these approaches have been applied to multiple watersheds, studies have revealed that parameter sensitivity varies across hydro-climatic gradients (Herman, Kollat, et al., 2013; Herman, Reed, et al., 2013; van Werkhoven et al., 2008). However, these studies have primarily focused on large, relatively distant watersheds where parameter controls are likely to be quite different. Also, many of these time-varying analyses focus on shorter periods (e.g., 10 years) and do not take into account how parameter importance varies during very wet periods or periods of drought. Thus, it is unclear if parameter importance varies linearly with fluctuating annual conditions or exhibits threshold behavior during annual extremes. Finally, few studies have combined these two approaches, leveraging a long-term period with extreme annual conditions and multiple proximal watersheds of varying sizes, to examine how parameter controls on model performance vary through time and across watersheds.
\
\
This study leverages time-varying, variance-based sensitivity analysis to evaluate a lumped watershed model framework applied to simulate streamflow in 21 watersheds located across California. Californian watersheds represent an ideal place to implement time-varying SA to assess the impact of annual variability on hydrologic dynamics given large variations in annual air temperature and precipitation as well as intense droughts these regions have experienced. Our analysis includes sites in three different regions across the state: watersheds located in the Sierra Nevada Mountains (snowmelt driven), watersheds located in northern California (high rainfall), and watersheds located in the Central Valley (low rainfall) (Figure 1). As precipitation availability across California watersheds may vary by an order of magnitude from year to year, identifying how controls on model performance vary at an annual scale and across watersheds is essential for determining how our approaches to calibration may need to change based on the period being simulated and to quantify environmental impacts on hydrologic systems. We first use a data-driven approach to quantify hydrologic signatures across these watersheds and to what extent these signatures vary from year to year. Next, we implemented model-based assessment of annual parameter sensitivity calculated with respect to metric of model performance (Kling-Gupta Efficiency, KGE) and the difference between observed and simulated hydrologic signatures, used to quantify different aspects of hydrologic functioning. In this analysis, our primary goal was to determine whether or not parameter sensitivities with respect to model error and model signatures across regionally distributed watersheds varied through time and space and to what extent this could be organized by watershed climate and topography. We hypothesized that parameter importance would vary from year to year, as strong annual weather shifts likely play an important role in parameter sensitivity. Since drought has been shown to have a profound effect on watershed function, we also expected parameter importance to shift during drought periods to parameters that are insensitive during average or wet periods. To our knowledge, this type of rigorous temporal parameter sensitivity comparison has not been published to date and thus is significant for filling the existing knowledge gap in this field. Alongside field observation, this type of approach has the potential to identify important watershed processes and how they vary during shifting weather conditions, which could be used to improve our understanding of model-inferred dominant hydrologic processes and how these processes may vary over multidecadal periods and across relatively proximal watersheds.
\
\
\
**References:**\
-World Meteorological Organization. (2017). Recent investigations. Retrieved from https://wmo.asu.edu/content/recent-investigations \
-Bates, B. C., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Wu, S., & Palutikof, J. P. (2008). Climate change and water (Technical paper of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC Secretariat. \
-Nijssen, B., O'Donnell, G. M., Hamlet, A. F., & Lettenmaier, D. P. (2001). Hydrologic sensitivity of global rivers to climate change. Climatic Change, 50(1–2), 143–175. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1010616428763 \
-Xu, C. (1999). Climate change and hydrologic models: A review of existing gaps and recent research developments. Water Resources Management, 13(5), 369–382. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008190900459 \
-Knowles, N., & Cayan, D. R. (2002). Potential effects of global warming on the Sacramento/San Joaquin watershed and the San Francisco estuary. Geophysical Research Letters, 29(18), 38-1–38-4. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001GL014339 \
-Medell n-Azuara, J., Harou, J. J., Olivares, M. A., Madani, K., Lund, J. R., Howitt, R. E., et al. (2008). Adaptability and adaptations of California's water supply system to dry climate warming. Climatic Change, 87(Suppl. 1), 75–90. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-007-9355-z \
-Miller, N. L., Bashford, K. E., & Strem, E. (2003). Potential impacts of climate change in California hydrology. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 39, 771–784. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2003.tb04404.x \
-Vicuna, S., Leonardson, R., Hanemann, M. W., Dale, L. L., & Dracup, J. A. (2008). Climate change impacts on high elevation hydropower generation in California's Sierra Nevada: a case study in the Upper American River. Climatic Change, 87(Suppl. 1), S123–S137. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-007-9365-x \
-Schewe, J., Heinke, J., Gerten, D., Haddeland, I., Arnell, N. W., Clark, D. B., et al. (2014). Multi-model assessment of water scarcity under climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(9), 3245–3250. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222460110 \
-Guse, B., Pfannerstill, M., Strauch, M., Reusser, D. E., Ludtke, S., Volk, M., et al. (2016). On characterizing the temporal dominance patterns of model parameters and processes. Hydrological Processes, 30, 2255–2270. https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.10764 \



