# Conference Abstracts

# AGU 2019

**Basijokaite, R., Kelleher, C. (2019). What can we learn from time-varying sensitivity analysis? AGU Fall Meeting, San Francisco, CA, USA.**

As climate change induced effects on weather patterns are becoming more apparent, it is becoming increasingly important to analyze how hydrologic systems respond to these changes at inter- and intra-annual time scales. To examine this, we applied time-varying sensitivity analysis to five watersheds located in various sites across California. In particular, we sought to analyze how strong seasonal and annual weather shifts may result in differences in parameter sensitivity from year to year and within a given year. Our analysis centers on this region because of its tendency for extreme weather events, which allows us to better analyze how these variations affect seasonal and annual hydrologic controls, assessed via sensitivity indices. To assess whether time-varying sensitivity analysis can reveal unique patterns in parameter importance through time, we simulated streamflow using a simple rainfall-runoff model (Hymod) over a 33-year period (1981-2014). Sensitivity analysis revealed that annual scale sensitivity results differ based on the metric they are assessed with respect to, but do not vary through time, or correlate with observable weather patterns. On the other hand, we discovered that sub-annual scale sensitivity analyses paint a much clearer picture of differences in responses within and between dry and wet years. Sensitive model parameters vary with annual and sub-annual conditions, with different controls emerging seasonally as well as during dry and wet years. More importantly, sub-annual sensitivity analysis can help us identify when parameter sensitivities diverge from those observed using annual metrics alone, potentially revealing when different processes are at play for simulating streamflow, informing our understanding of both model improvements and watershed functioning.

# AGU 2018

**Basijokaite, R., Kelleher, C. (2018). Time-Varying Sensitivity Analysis and its Relationship to Shifting Annual Conditions in California Watersheds. AGU Fall Meeting, Washington, DC, USA.**

Changing climate affects watershed hydrologic cycles, therefore it is becoming increasingly important to analyze outcomes of this variability on long-term watershed behavior. To examine this, we applied time-varying sensitivity analysis to twelve watersheds located in various sites across California. In particular, we aim to analyze how strong seasonal and annual shifts from wet to dry may be attributed to shifting importance of different model parameters and therefore key watershed processes. We focus on this region in particular because of its climate and tendency for extreme weather events, which allows us to better analyze the effects of changing climate on watershed controls. Hydrology was simulated using a simple lumped rainfall-runoff model (Hymod) over a 36-year period (1981-2015). Sensitivity analysis revealed that watersheds at different elevations experienced differential importance of baseflow contributions. Moreover, yearly parameter importance applied to hydrologic signatures compared across 36 years showed varying parameter sensitivity from year to year in addition to a few abnormal annual responses in years with extreme floods and extreme droughts. This work reveals different watershed responses to changing climate conditions and provides important information that can be additionally tested with data driven approaches to helps us better understand hydrologic controls in watersheds with strong seasonal and annual shifts in behavior.
